# PREDICTING READMISSION OF DIABETIC PATIENTS
__General Assembly Santa Monica  
Data Science Immersive, Summer 2016  
Michael Gat__  

This folder contains the work done for my Capstone project, which involved examination of a medical dataset and an attempt to build a model which could identify patients that were at risk of a readmission event after being hospitalized and diagnosed with a diabetic condition or complication.

The dataset in use is from the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository. At the time of this writing it can be found at:  
[https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Diabetes+130-US+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Diabetes+130-US+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)

## Contents
This folder contains six (6) iPython Notebooks, one Excel spreadsheet, and two pdf files containing presentation materials. In addition, it contains two datasets from the UC Irvine Machine Learning Repository and one dataset generated by the project.
* __Capstone_1.ipynb__ - Contains initial data load and data wrangling. The output of this notebook is a csv file containing the data reorganized and reformatted in a manner that I deemed most appropriate for use in the classification program I was building. **It is necessary to run this notebook to completion prior to running any other notebooks in this project!**
* __Capstone_1A.ipynb__ - Contains some data exploration and graphing that I used to better understand the distribution of key data fields. This information was useful to me in deciding where to focus my initial efforts but may not be necessary in order to follow the rest of the project.
* __Capstone_2.ipynb__ - Contains the initial model build, using the most common 17 features and Chi Squared feature selection. Identifies Gaussian Naive Bayes as the best model to use, but achieves very poor results.
* __Capstone_3.ipynb__ - Builds on the previous notebook, expanding out the code to try different numbers of features. Using Chi Squared feature selection and Naive Bayes. Begins to achieve a level of precision and specificity that is potentially useful.
* __Capstone_4.ipynb__ - Continues to build on the previous work. Adds undersampling of the no-readmit category using the **imbalanced_learn** package. Achieves useful levels of precision and specificity selecting 8 features of the 17 included in the data.
* __Capstone_5.ipynb__ - Uses the model built in Part 4, but now adds all available featues (total of 62) from which to select. Optimal model uses 14 features selected using Chi Squared and Naive Bayes.
* __Capstone_Results.xlsx__ - Key results from test runs of Notebooks 2-5 are summarized here.
* __DSI_Capstone_Proposal.pdf__ - Project proposal as presented in class.
* __DSI_Capstone_Final.pdf___ - Project final presentation given at General Assembly.
* __diabetic_data.csv__ - Main dataset
* __IDs_mapping.csv__ - Explanitory file with information about the meanings of three key fields
* __diabetic_data_clean.csv__ - Dataset generated by **Capstone_1.ipynb**. It will be regenerated every time the notebook is run.

## Python Packages Used
* [Pandas](http://pandas.pydata.org/)
* [scikit-learn](http://scikit-learn.org/stable/)
* [imbalanced-learn](http://contrib.scikit-learn.org/imbalanced-learn/)
* [numpy](http://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/)

## References
The original research done with this dataset may be located at: [http://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/](http://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/)  
This paper also contains additional information about the dataset and documentation of the information contained in some of its fields.

In the process of preparing this study I also relied on other similar research, including:  
* [Predictive risk modelling for early hospital readmission of patients with diabetes in India](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13410-016-0511-8) from which I gained a better understanding of the various methods of feature selection and the importance of oversampling/undersampling data in an unbalanced dataset like the one I was working with. This led to a significant improvement in developing a model that was not very robust or useful prior to the introduction of these concepts.  
* [Big Data Solutions for Predicting Risk-of-Readmission for Congestive Heart Failure
Patients](https://cwds.uw.edu/sites/default/files/publications/Big%20Data%20Solutions%20for%20Predicting%20Risk-of-Readmission%20for%20Congestive%20Heart%20Failure.pdf) which further reinforced the above concepts and provided further grounding in the field.

## Thanks
I must thank Dr. Jay Yourst for words of advice along the way, and must also offer my gratitude to my mentors, colleagues and miscellenous online counterparts who kept me on track and relatively sane through this period. I do wonder if any of you ever sleep. You know who you are.

Floppy and Flash, you didn't claw me to shreds even though I deserved it a few times. Thanks and fishy treats to both of you.

Thanks to everybody in my cohort. Being the first data science immersive in LA and only the second in GA history was not easy. I know I suck at showing it, but you helped keep me on track and gave me just the right inspiration when I needed it.

Finally thanks to my instructors John Marin, Pauline Chow and Michael Ludwig. I realize that attempting to teach me is often an exasperating experience, so thanks for being far more patient with me than I often was with you.

From my perch in the back corner, I appreciate all you've all done.
